Newsletters: add 302 (2024-05-15) (#1655)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _posts/en/newsletters/2024-05-15-newsletter.md

---
title: 'Bitcoin Optech Newsletter #302'
permalink: /en/newsletters/2024/05/15/
name: 2024-05-15-newsletter
slug: 2024-05-15-newsletter
type: newsletter
layout: newsletter
lang: en
---
This week's newsletter FIXME

## News

> - **Release of utreexod beta:** Calvin Kim [posted][kim utreexo] to the

Reviewer: I don't know if you'd like to link to this, but I learned about UtreeXO from this Bitcoin Explained (van Wirdum and Sjors) podcast episode (Oct 30, 2020), I thought it was very good: https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/episode-15-utreexo/id1532957243?i=1000496616418

Author: I'd prefer not to link to podcasts.  If there's any good documentation about something, I think we should add links to it on our topic page.

>   Bitcoin-Dev mailing list to announce the beta release of `utreexod`, a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Bitcoin-Dev mailing list to announce the beta release of utreexod, a
```

  full node with support for [utreexo][topic utreexo].  Utreexo allows a
  node to store a small commitment to the state of the UTXO set rather
  than the entire set itself; for example, a minimal commitment can be
  32 bytes and the current full set is about 12 GB, making the

>   commitment on the order of about a billion times smaller.  To reduce

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  commitment on the order of a billion times smaller.  To reduce
```

  bandwidth, utreexo may store additional commitments, increasing its
  use of disk space, but still keeping its chainstate roughly on the

>   order of a million times smaller than a traditional full node.

Reviewer 2: Is this sentence on storing additional commitments an interpretation of this bullet point from the ML post?

> - Efficient P2P transaction relay with support for caching utreexo proofs for
  mempool transactions.

If so, then it seems wrong to say "utreexo may store additional commitments", since utreexo by itself is a deterministic accumulator that stores the minimum amount of data necessary. It would be more accurate to say "**a utreexo node** may **cache** additional commitments". The ML post also doesn't say whether these are cached on disk or in memory, so I would double check the claim that it uses more disk space.

Author: No, it's not derived from that line in the ML post.  It's a simple observation that utreexo can save an extraordinary amount of bandwidth by storing a few kilobytes to megabytes of the intermediate merkle nodes near the root of the tree, instead of including them with every transaction.

I don't know if Kim's implementation does that, but we're talking about utreexo in general here.

>   use of disk space, but still keeping its chainstate roughly on the
>   order of a million times smaller than a traditional full node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  use of disk space, but still keeping its chainstate roughly
  a million times smaller than a traditional full node.
```

Author: Leaving as-is.  I think "roughly on the order of x" can span multiple magnitudes (e.g. 1 to 100), whereas "roughly x" probably means within a single magnitude (e.g. 1 to 3).  I'm being vague here because there are a lot of tradeoffs available with utreexo for bandwidth versus data storage.

>   A utreexo node that also prunes old blocks can run in small constant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  A utreexo node that also prunes old blocks can run in a small constant
```

  amount of disk space, whereas even pruned regular full nodes can have
  their chainstate grow beyond the bounds of a device's storage capacity.

  The release notes posted by Kim indicate that the node is compatible
  with [BDK][bdk repo]-based wallets, plus many other wallets through
  support for [Electrum personal server][].  The node supports
  transaction relay with extensions to the P2P network protocol for

>   allowing relay of utreexo proofs.  Both _regular_ and _bridge_ utreexo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  allowing the relay of utreexo proofs.  Both _regular_ and _bridge_ utreexo
```

  nodes are supported; regular utreexo nodes use the utreexo commitment
  to save disk space; bridge nodes store the complete UTXO state plus
  some additional data and can attach utreexo proofs to blocks and
  transactions created by nodes and wallets that don't support utreexo
  yet.

>   Utreexo does not require any consensus changes and utreexo nodes do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Utreexo requires no consensus changes and utreexo nodes do
```
Or, "Utreexo does not require consensus changes" (the word "any" seems like overly-convincing language).

  not interfere with non-utreexo nodes, although regular utreexo nodes
  can only peer with other regular and bridge utreexo nodes.

  Kim includes several warnings in his announcement: "the code and
  protocol is not peer reviewed [...] there will be breaking changes
  [...] utreexod is based on [btcd][] [which may have] consensus
  incompatibilities".

- **BIP119 extensions for smaller hashes and arbitrary data commitments:**
  Jeremy Rubin [posted][rubin bip119e] to the Bitcoin-Dev mailing list a
  [proposed BIP][bip119e] to extend the proposed
  [OP_CHECKTEMPLATEVERIFY][topic op_checktemplateverify] (`OP_CTV`) with
  two additional features:

  - *Support for HASH160 hashes:* these are the hash digests used for
    P2PKH, P2SH, and P2WPKH addresses.  They are 20 bytes compared to
    the 32-byte hash digests used in the base [BIP119][] proposal.  In

>     naive multiparty protocols, a [collision attack][] against a 20 byte

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    naive multiparty protocols, a [collision attack][] against a 20-byte
```

    hash can be performed in about 2<sup>80</sup> brute force
    operations, which is within reach of a highly motivated attacker.
    For this reason, modern Bitcoin opcodes typically use 32-byte
    hash digests.  However, security in single-party protocols or
    well-designed multiparty protocols using 20-byte hashes can be
    increased to make compromise unlikely in less than about
    2<sup>160</sup> brute-force operations, allowing those protocols to
    save about 12 bytes per digest.  One case where that might be useful
    is in implementations of the [eltoo][topic eltoo] protocol (see
    [Newsletter #284][news284 eltoo].

  - *Support for additional commitments:* `OP_CTV` only succeeds if it
    is executed within a transaction that contains inputs and outputs
    that hash to the same value as a provided hash digest.  One of those
    outputs could be an `OP_RETURN` output that commits to some data

>     that the script creator wants published to the blockchain, such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    that the script creator wants to be published to the blockchain, such as
```

    data necessary to recover LN channel state from a backup.  However,

>     putting data in the witness field would significantly less expensive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    putting data in the witness field would be significantly less expensive.
```

    The proposed updated form of `OP_CTV` requires an additional piece

>     of data from the witness stack be included when the inputs and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    of data from the witness stack to be included when the inputs and
```

  The proposal has not received any discussion on the mailing list as of
  this writing.

## Releases and release candidates

*New releases and release candidates for popular Bitcoin infrastructure
projects.  Please consider upgrading to new releases or helping to test
release candidates.*

- [LND v0.18.0-beta.rc2][] is a release candidate for the next major
  version of this popular LN node.

<!-- FIXME:harding to update Tuesday -->

## Notable code and documentation changes

_Notable recent changes in [Bitcoin Core][bitcoin core repo], [Core
Lightning][core lightning repo], [Eclair][eclair repo], [LDK][ldk repo],
[LND][lnd repo], [libsecp256k1][libsecp256k1 repo], [Hardware Wallet
Interface (HWI)][hwi repo], [Rust Bitcoin][rust bitcoin repo], [BTCPay
Server][btcpay server repo], [BDK][bdk repo], [Bitcoin Improvement
Proposals (BIPs)][bips repo], [Lightning BOLTs][bolts repo],
[Bitcoin Inquisition][bitcoin inquisition repo], and [BINANAs][binana
repo]._

- [Bitcoin Core #29845][] updates several `get*info` RPCs to change the
  `warnings` field from a string to an array of strings so that several
  warnings can be returned instead of just one.

> - [Core Lightning #7111][] Plugins: Can now opt in to handle `check` command on their commands, for more thorough checking.  FIXME:Gustavojfe to write

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Core Lightning #7111][] Plugins: Can now opt in to handle the `check` command on their commands, for more thorough checking.  FIXME:Gustavojfe to write
```

- [Libsecp256k1 #1518][] adds a `secp256k1_pubkey_sort` function that
  sorts a set of public keys into a canonical order.  This is useful for
  both [MuSig2][topic musig] and [silent payments][topic silent

>   payments], and likely many other protocols involving multiple keys.

Reviewer 2: This was already reported on in last week's newsletter as part of the release announcement.

Author: Yes, but it wasn't reported in this section (because it hadn't been merged when I began writing last week's newsletter).

On several prior ocassions, we've described PRs after previously mentioning them in the release section, since we compile those different sections at different times.  There's no harm in mentioning things twice and often some benefit when the second mention goes into additional detail.

- [Rust Bitcoin #2707][] ensures that the API for tagged hashes
  introduced as part of [taproot][topic taproot] expects the digests in
  _internal byte order_ by default.  Previously, the API expected the
  hashes in _display byte order_, which can now be obtained with code

>   like `#[hash_newtype(backward)]`.  For [historic reasons][mb3e byte

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  like `#[hash_newtype(backward)]`.  For [historical reasons][mb3e byte
```
(it's not like the reasons are worth remembering and honoring forever! 😁 )

  order], the txid and block identifier hash digests appear inside
  transactions and blocks in one byte order (internal byte order) but
  are displayed and called in user interfaces in the reverse order
  (display byte order).  This PR tries to prevent even more hashes from
  having different byte orders for different circumstances.

> - [BIPs #1389][] adds [BIP388][] that describes "wallet policies for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [BIPs #1389][] adds [BIP388][] which describes "wallet policies for
```

  descriptor wallets", a templated set of [output script
  descriptors][topic descriptors] that may be easier for a broad set of

>   wallets to support both in code and in their user interface.  In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  wallets to support in both code and their user interface.  In
```

  particular, descriptors can be challenging to implement on hardware
  wallets with limited resources and limited screen space.  The BIP388

>   wallet policies allows software and hardware that opts-in to it to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  wallet policies allow software and hardware that opts-in to it to
```

  make simplifying assumptions about how descriptors will be used; this
  minimizes the scope of descriptors, reducing the amount of code needed
  and the number of details that need to be verified by users.  Any

>   software needing the full power of descriptors can still use it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  software needing the full power of descriptors can still be
```

  outside of BIP388.  For additional information, see [Newsletter
  #200][news200 policies].

- [BIPs #1567][] adds [BIP387][] with new `multi_a()` and
  `sortedmultia_a()` descriptors that provide scripted multisig
  capabilities within [tapscript][topic tapscript].  Taking an example
  from the BIP, the descriptor fragment
  `multi_a(k,KEY_1,KEY_2,...,KEY_n)` will produce a script such as
  `KEY_1 OP_CHECKSIG KEY_2 OP_CHECKSIGADD ... KEY_n OP_CHECKSIGADD OP_k
  OP_NUMEQUAL`.  See also Newsletters [#191][news191 multi_a],
  [#227][news227 multi_a], and [#273][news273 multi_a].

- [BIPs #1525][] adds [BIP347][] which proposes an [OP_CAT][topic
  op_cat] opcode that could be used in [tapscript][topic tapscript] if
  it was [activated][topic soft fork activation] in a soft fork.  See
  also Newsletters [#274][news274 op_cat], [#275][news275 op_cat],
  and [#293][news293 op_cat].

## Newsletter publication date changes

In the coming weeks, Optech will be experimenting with alternative
publication dates.  Please don't be surprised if you receive the

> newsletter a few days early or late.

Reviewer: This is a good way to say it

---
title: 'Bitcoin Optech Newsletter #302'
permalink: /en/newsletters/2024/05/15/
name: 2024-05-15-newsletter
slug: 2024-05-15-newsletter
type: newsletter
layout: newsletter
lang: en
---
This week's newsletter announces the beta release of a full node

> supporting utreexo and summarizes a two proposed extensios to BIP119

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
supporting utreexo and summarizes a two proposed extensions to BIP119
```
